---
title: 'Werewolf Mathematics, Spooky Scarey'
date: 2019-09-19
permalink: /posts/2019/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Epidemiology
  - Werewolf
  - SIR Model
  - Ecology & Evolution & Dungeons & Dragons
---


A werewolf has been spotted in a nearby village, the paladin Sir Model has been dispatched to try and prevent an outbreak of werewolves. 

Hold on though, we never hear about werewolf epidemics, do we? Which is odd when you think about it, lycanthropy (the pseudo-medical term for werewolf-disease) is spread by being bitten by a werewolf, something that presumably the werewolf could do a lot in a short amount of time, even if they only get one chance a month to really let their hair down. But usually we only see one or a few werewolves at a given time. What’s going on then? Sir Model will help us illustrate, and will simultaneously serve as the most egregious pun I’ve ever perpetrated. 

Upon arrival at the village Sir Model begins to think of the folk in two ways. People who could become werewolves, and people who already are werewolves. When he gets started, he'll make a third group, people who used to be werewolves. Traditionally that involves quite a bit of silver, generally very sharp. But it doesn’t take a professional to deal with a werewolf problem, with enough torches and pitchforks your average mob of villagers can take a stab at it. However, according to the Tao of Pratchett, the intelligence of a mob is that of it’s stupidest member divided by the total number of mobsters, so the mob ends up picking someone basically at random. So while they do have a chance of getting a werewolf, the odds are pretty low. In fact, the odds of the mob actually getting one are equal to the number of werewolves per potential werewolves. 

Sir Model, while not perfect himself, is a bit more effective. In the Van Helsing scale of monster killing he’s about 0.1VH, not great but not too bad. One Van Helsing can dispatch 10 monsters in a given time, so 0.1VH means Sir Model can effectively remove 1 werewolf a month. 

The next big question then is how many people can the werewolf turn? Well, traditionally werewolves are fairly savage, so they end up killing more villagers then they turn. Remember that to become a werewolf you have to be bitten, not eaten. So lets say that every month on the night of the full moon, the werewolf catches one villager and eats them nine times out of ten. That last time is the kicker though, because while that ‘lucky’ villager survives the encounter, by the time the next full moon comes around we’ll have two werewolves galavanting about, each with the chance to make a new werewolf. 

Now that I’ve introduced some numbers and driven off at least half the readers I can reveal my dastardly plot. Sir Model is in actuality an initialism and pun, my unimaginative stand in for the SIR model. The S, I, and R each stand for different groups. Epidemiologists call this a compartment model, because of the grouping of people into compartments, and this one in particular is called the SIR model (which is an initialism like FBI, so you read the letters and don’t say ‘sir’) and thus the worst pun I’ve committed is revealed. We can think of ours as as the VWD model, Villagers, Werewolves, and Dead. In the real world we have Susceptible, Infected, and Removed. Susceptible and Villagers are the group who can succumb to the disease (lycanthropy or some real-world equivalent), Infected and Werewolf are the group that actually have the disease, and Removed or Dead are the group that got better or died. Surprise, you’ve just learned some basic epidemiology, the study of how diseases spread. 

And because we can count the number of people in each group, and estimate how many people the werewolf can turn and how many werewolves Sir Model can eliminate, we can learn some things. Chiefly, we can learn whether or not we will have an outbreak of werewolves. Which seems like it would be good to know; whether the problem will be taken care of or whether everyone will be turned into monsters or die. And horror of horrors, we’ll use math to learn something useful. What few readers remain, don’t worry, I won’t ask you to do any yourselves but I do hope to demonstrate that your middle school algebra teacher was right all along. Even if they didn’t think to use math to keep you safe from an epidemic of werewolves. 

First, some pictures:
