---
title: "Antifreeze Proteins: Busting Biofilms and Crushing Ice Crystals"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2015-09-26-igem
venue: "iGEM Giant Jamboree"
date: 2015-09-26
location: "Boston, MA"
---

Our presentation at the international iGEM meeting on our antifreeze protein research as it relates to the biofilm formation properties of bacteria engineered to express them. More information on the project can be found [here](http://2015.igem.org/Team:WPI-Worcester/Description). 

Abstract
-----
Antifreeze proteins (AFPs) have evolved in numerous cold-dwelling species to protect against the formation of cell-lysing ice crystals in subzero temperatures. AFPs have many applications from tissue preservation to food security and more, but recently a novel application has emerged: inhibiting biofilms. Biofilms are problematic in many settings including healthcare, manufacturing, and the environment. The use of AFPs as anti-biofilm factors is intriguing, however, only a single AFP has yet been shown to inhibit biofilms. We built a diverse library of AFPs and characterized both their antifreeze and biofilm-inhibiting properties in E. coli. Our results demonstrate novel biofilm-inhibiting properties for some AFPs and further characterize the freeze protection properties of many AFPs at low subzero temperatures. Our results will inform the design of novel synthetic AFPs optimized for use in E. coli, and provide a valuable new resource for the integration of AFPs into synthetic biology and biotechnology applications.
