---
title: "Pairwise Comparison of the Gut Microbiome in Microscopic Colitis"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-06-03-ddw
venue: "Digestive Disease Week"
date: 2018-06-03
location: "Washington, DC"
---

We presented our microscopic colitis microbiome data preliminary results, more info can be found [here](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-5085(18)31688-3). This work was later published, see our paper [Microscopic Colitis is Characterized by Intestinal Dysbiosis](https://davidmmorgan.github.io/publication/2019-06-21-microscopic-colitis) for more information.

Abstract
---
Microscopic  colitis is  thought  to  result  in  part from  inappropriate  immuneresponse to the gut microbiota in genetically susceptible hosts. However, longitudinal altera-tions in gut microbiota in microscopic colitis have not been previously examined.Methods:We analyzed the stool microbiota from 11 patients with a median age of 62 years (range:24-92) with microscopic colitis during both active and remission phase (22 samples, cohorts1  and  2)  and  compared  these  to  11  age-  and  sex-matched  controls  from  patients  withchronic diarrhea without microscopic colitis or inflammatory bowel disease (cohort 3) usingshotgun metagenomic sequencing with a depth of 10-15 million reads per sample. At thetime  of  enrollment,  participants  had  not  used  antibiotics  for  at  least  3  months.  Speciesand  metabolic  pathway  abundances  were  estimated  using  MetaPhlAn2  and  HUMAnN2,respectively.  Species  richness  was  assessed  using  alpha  diversity  and  we  calculated  betadiversity utilizing the Bray-Curtis method and principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) usingmultidimensional scaling (MDS). We used multivariate association with linear models (MaAs-Lin) to identify species and metabolic pathways that significantly differ between active andremission  samples  while  adjusting  for  other  metadata.Results:The  50  most  prevalentspecies from  the three cohorts  are summarized in  a heatmap  (Figure 1). We  observed astatistically significant difference in species richness as measured by alpha diversity whencomparing active vs. remission states in microscopic colitis (P= 0.0038,Figure 2A). Chronicdiarrhea controls had greater species richness compared to patients with active microscopiccolitis, although the comparison did not reach statistical significance (P= 0.08,Figure 2A).Disease status was the single most influential factor in determining microbial communitystructure as measured by PCoA (Figure 2B). Several species, includingEggerthella lentaandHaemophilus parainfluenzae, and key metabolic pathways, including chorismate biosynthesisfrom 3-dehydroquinate and adenosine deoxyribonucleotides de novo biosynthesis II, weresignificantly different between the active and remission states. The difference, however, didnot reach statistical significance after adjusting for multiple comparisons using false discoveryrate.Conclusion:The gut dysbiosis central to active microscopic colitis more closely resem-bles inflammatory bowel disease than non-inflammatory diarrhea. Larger-scale studies arerequired to further characterize individual species and microbiota-encoded metabolic changesin active microscopic colitis.

Figures can be seen [here](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-5085(18)31688-3)
